---
layout: post
title:  "Portfolio Optimization Part 0: Introduction"
date:   2021-04-24 20:51:00 -0400
categories: portfolio optimization
---

## Introduction

I want to write those notes on portfolio optimization down so that I have a reference for myself in case I forgot them.

However, I do want to emphasize is that there is nothing special about the optimizer that is going to be described in this set of notes. All the information can be found in various text books on active portfolio management and market microstructure/algorithmic trading. The ones that I referenced here are:

- **Empirical Market Microstructure** by **Joe Hasbrouck**,
- **Active Portfolio Management** by **Richard C. Grinold** and **Ronald N. Kahn**.

My mathemtical notes are textbooks from my college years (Tsinghua Unviversity Press), but it should suffice with only MOSEK and Intel MKL documentation.

- [MOSEK Documentation](https://www.mosek.com/documentation/),
- [Intel MKL Documentation](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/onemkl-developer-reference-c/top.html).

## Goal

The purpose of this set of notes is not to teach a person the theory behind a portfolio optimizer and how to write them. Instead, the purpose here is to reinforce what the textbooks have taught everyone, and then provide some observations that are interesting, known pitfalls, and some shortcuts that you can take.

Futhermore, this set of notes gears more towards slow portfolio, where many intricacies of market microstructure don't matter that much.

Lastly, many of the notes here are not mathemtically accurate, and many times  the choice is made for convenience instead for accuracy. Finger crossed the error term is not that big.

## Conic Optimization

I should also note that only conic optimization is used here - there are many advanced optimization techniques, for example, [using tensorflow](https://medium.com/quaintitative/experimenting-with-portfolio-optimisation-with-tensorflow-d3-dashboard-4387231bb13c).

This also prevents the optimizer here from solving some actual problems. For example, there may be a need to construct a risk parity portfolio from a list of different stock portfolios that all can be individually traded.